.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1990, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)intro.7	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/5/93
.\"
.Dd June 5, 1993
.Dt INTRO 7
.Os BSD 4.2
.Sh NAME
.Nm intro
.Nd miscellaneous information pages
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This section contains miscellaneous documentation:
.Bl -tag -width /usr/
.It Xr ascii 7
The ASCII character set.
.It Xr environ 7
The user environment.
.It Xr hier 7
The system filesystem layout.
.It Xr hostname 7
A description of host name resolution.
.It Xr mailaddr 7
A description of electronic mail addressing.
.It Xr mdoc 7
A quick reference guide for the
.Dq -mdoc
macro package.
.It Xr mdoc.samples 7
A tutorial sampler for writing BSD manuals using the
.Dq -mdoc
macro package.
.It Xr operator 7
The C language operator precedence and order of evaluation.
.It Xr rs-232 7
RS-232 signal names and connector configurations.
.El
.Pp
In addition, there are several miscellaneous dictionaries and data files on
the system.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width /usr/
.It Pa /usr/share/dict/propernames
A list of (largely American) proper names.
.It Pa /usr/share/dict/web2
Webster's Second International Dictionary, copyright 1934.
.It Pa /usr/share/dict/web2a
Webster's Second International Dictionary, copyright 1934,
supplemental list with hyphenated terms as well as assorted
noun and adverbial phrases.
.It Pa /usr/share/dict/words
A smaller dictionary style wordlist of unknown origin.
.It Pa /usr/share/misc/airport
Three-letter airport codes.
.It Pa /usr/share/misc/ascii
Octal, hexadecimal and decimal ASCII character sets.
See
.Xr ascii 7
for more information.
.It Pa /usr/share/misc/birthtoken
Month-of-birth flowers and stones.
.It Pa /usr/share/misc/countrycodes
ISO 3166 country codes.
.It Pa /usr/share/misc/flowers
The secret language of flowers.
.It Pa /usr/share/misc/inter.phone
International area codes, indexed by city.
Up-to-date information can be obtained from the Web in various locations.
.It Pa /usr/share/misc/man.template
A template for manual pages, using the historic
.Dq -man
macro package.
.It Pa /usr/share/misc/mdoc.template
A template for manual pages, using the Berkeley
.Dq -mdoc
macro package.
.It Pa /usr/share/misc/na.phone
North American area codes, indexed by city.
Up-to-date information can be obtained from the Web in various locations.
.It Pa /usr/share/misc/operator
C operator precedence and order of evaluation.
See
.Xr operator 7
for more information.
.It Pa /usr/share/misc/zipcodes
United States Postal Service Zipcodes, indexed by city.
Up-to-date information can be obtained from the Postal Service
Web information at
.Dq http://www.usps.gov .
.El    
.Sh EXAMPLES
To get Boise's ZIP codes:
.Pp
.Dl "grep Boise /usr/share/misc/zipcodes"
.Pp
To discover the state in which area code 207 resides:
.Pp
.Dl "grep 207 /usr/share/misc/na.phone"
.Pp
To find out what flower to send to communicate to your beloved the thought
.Dq "I change but in death" :
.Pp
.Dl "grep death /usr/share/misc/flowers"
.Sh BUGS
The area codes and ZIP codes are always out of date.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr man 1
.Xr intro 1
.Xr intro 2
.Xr intro 3
.Xr intro 4
.Xr intro 6
.Xr intro 8
