All software in this package is provided under the following license:

"In no event shall Cisco's or its suppliers' liability to Licensee, whether
in contract, tort (including negligence), or otherwise, exceed the price
paid by Licensee.
 
This License is effective until terminated. Licensee may terminate this
License at any time by destroying all copies of software including any
documentation. This License will terminate immediately without notice from
Cisco if Licensee fails to comply with any provision of this License. Upon
termination, Licensee must destroy all copies of software.
  
This License shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws
of the State of California, United States of America, as if performed
wholly within the state and without giving effect to the principles of
conflict of law. If any portion hereof is found to be void or
unenforceable, the remaining provisions of this License shall remain in
full force and effect. This License constitutes the entire License between
the parties with respect to the use of the software."

If licensee is the U.S. Government, then the following restrictions apply:
Restricted Rights - Cisco's software is provided to non-DOD agencies with
RESTRICTED RIGHTS and its supporting documentation is provided with LIMITED
RIGHTS. Use, duplication, or disclosure by the Government is subject to the
restrictions as set forth in subparagraph "C" of the Commercial Computer
Software - Restricted Rights clause at FAR 52.227-19. In the event the sale
is to a DOD agency, the government's rights in software, supporting 
documentation, and technical data are governed by the restrictions in the
Technical Data Commercial Items clause at DFARS 252.227-7015 and DFARS
227.7202.

