.\"	@(#)local:usr/src/cmd/qpopper/popauth.8 4.0 19 March 2001
.\"	
.\"	@(MHWARNING)
.\" @(#)$Id: popauth.8, v4.0 2001/3/19 05:01:06 qpop Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 QUALCOMM Incorporated. All rights reserved.
.\" See License.txt file for terms and conditions for modification and
.\" redistribution.
.\"
.TH POPAUTH 8
.SH NAME
popauth \-\- manipulate POP authorization DB
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B popauth
[
.BI \-trace " tracefile"
] [
.BI \-debug
] [
.BI \-init
[
.I  \-safe
]
]
.if n .ti +8n
[
.BI \-list
[
.I    user
|
.I    ALL
]
] [
.BI \-delete " user"
]
.if n .ti +8n
[
.BI \-user " user"
[
.I    password
]
] [
.BI \-help
] [
.BI \-version
]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIpopauth\fR program allows POP subscribers to add or change the secret
values used to generate their authentication credentials, or to verify the
existance of their records.

In addition, the super\-user or master POP user can add, delete, or reset
credential data for a user, or list which records exist.  Only the
super\-user may initialize the database.  \fIpopauth\fR is useful only when
the APOP (or SCRAM) configuration option is defined.  See the INSTALL file
in the Qpopper distribution for more information.

Under normal usage,
\fIpopauth\fR prompts for a new secret,
just like the \fIpasswd\fR program.  It then updates the authorization DB.

With the
.I \-user
switch,
the super\-user or master POP user can create or reset credential data
for the specified user.  This switch allows the password to be specified
on the command line, which avoids the usual prompts and checks.  This is
mostly useful in a batch environment, such as in a script.

With the
.I \-init
switch,
the super\-user can create a new (or zero the existing) authorization DB.

With the
.I \-list
switch,
the super\-user or master POP user can verify the presence of a record
for the indicated user, or list users who have records.  Users can
verify the presence of their own records with this switch.

With the
.I \-delete
switch, the super-user or master POP user can remove
a user entry from the authorization DB.
.SH FILES
/etc/pop.auth.* POP authorization DB
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This program was derived from MH 6.8.3
.SH SEE ALSO
popper(8), poppassd(8)
