'\" t
.\" Copyright [C] The Regents of the University of Michigan and Merit Network,
.\" Inc. 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998 All Rights Reserved.
.TH DICTIONARY 5 "9 December 1997"
.SH NAME
dictionary \- dictionary translations for parsing \s-2RADIUS\s+2 requests
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ../raddb/dictionary
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
The
.I dictionary
file resides in the Merit \s-2AAA\s+2 server configuration directory (named
.I .../raddb
somewhere).  It contains a list of dictionary translations which the
Merit \s-2AAA\s+2 server will use to parse incoming requests and to generate
outgoing responses.
Comments are indicated by leading pound sign
.RB (' # ')
characters.
All such comment lines are ignored (as are blank lines).
.LP
All transactions are composed of Attribute/Value Pairs.
The value of each attribute is specified as one of four data
.IR <type> s.
.LP
Valid
.I <types>
include:
.sp
.TS
;
l l.
string	\- \s-20\-253\s+2 octets
vendor	\- octet #\s-20\s+2 is zero, then three octets \s-2IANA\s+2 #, then the rest
octets	\- \s-20\-253\s+2 undistinguished octets
abinary	\- \s-20\-254\s+2 Ascend binary filter octets
ipaddr	\- \s-24\s+2 octets in network byte order
octet	\- \s-28\s+2 bit integer value
short	\- \s-216\s+2 bit integer value in big endian order (high byte first)
integer	\- \s-232\s+2 bit integer value in big endian order (high byte first)
date	\- \s-232\s+2 bit value in big endian order \- seconds since \s-200:00:00 GMT,  J\s+2an.  \s-21,  1970\s+2
.TE
.PD 1.0v
.LP
The \s-2ATTRIBUTE\s+2 entries consist of four required fields and one
optional fifth field:
.IP
.I "       \s-2ATTRIBUTE\s+2" "   <attribute-name>" "   <integer-encoding>" "   <type>" "  <pruning>"
.LP
The \s-2VALUE\s+2 entries consist of four fields:
.IP
.I "       \s-2VALUE\s+2" "        <attribute-name>" "    <value-name>" "         <integer-encoding>"
.LP
For example:
.IP
.ft B
\s-2ATTRIBUTE\s+2       \s-2F\s+2ramed-\s-2P\s+2rotocol         \s-27\s+2       integer  (1,0)
.LP
and
.IP
.ft B
\s-2VALUE\s+2             \s-2F\s+2ramed-\s-2P\s+2rotocol         \s-2PPP\s+2    \s-21\s+2
.LP
The optional
.I <pruning>
field on attribute lines controls two features of the Merit \s-2AAA\s+2 server:
.RS 0.5i
.IP a) 10
whether the attribute is ever sent to the \s-2NAS\s+2
.IP b) 10
how the \s-2NAS\s+2 reacts to a reply which contains the attribute
.RE
.LP
The syntax of the
.I <pruning>
expressions is as folows:
.IP
.I "[ ( [<ack>] [ [ [,] [<nak>] ] [ [,] [ \s-2MAY\s+2 \(bv \s-2MUST\s+2 \(bv \s-2CONFIG\s+2 ] ] ] ) ]"
.br
.nf
.I "    \\\\__feature 'a)' above__/\0\0\0\0\0\0\\\\__feature 'b)' above__/  "
.fi
.LP
In 'a)' above,
.I <ack>
and
.I <nak>
are one of '0', '1' or '*'.
The
.I <ack>
and
.I <nak>
values affect Access-Accept and Access-Reject replies, respectively.
These values represent:
.RS 0.5i
.IP 0 10
no attributes of this kind are part of the final reply (\s-2DEFAULT\s+2)
.IP 1 10
at most, one attribute of this kind may be part of the final reply
.IP * 10
any number of attributes of this kind may be part of the final reply
.RE
.LP
The default values for both
.I <ack>
and
.I <nak>
are '0'!
Keep this in mind when adding vendor specific attributes since they will not be
returned to the \s-2NAS\s+2 in any replies unless this expression exists.
.LP
In 'b)' above, the keywords define how the \s-2NAS\s+2 reacts to the attribute:
.RS 0.5i
.IP \s-2MUST\s+2 10
the \s-2NAS\s+2 must reject the request if it does not recognize this attribute
.IP \s-2MAY\s+2 10
the \s-2NAS\s+2 may ignore the attribute if not recognized (\s-2DEFAULT\s+2)
.IP \s-2CONFIG\s+2 10
the attribute is a configuration item
.RE
.LP
The \s-2CONFIG\s+2 keyword is only for the internal use of this
Merit \s-2AAA\s+2 server and must be given by itself (i.e.,
.B "(config)"
at the end of the attribute line).
.LP
If any value is omitted, but the comma is present for that value,
then just that value takes on the default.
The keywords \s-2MAY\s+2 and \s-2MUST\s+2 only are meaningful
for \s-2RADIUS\s+2 version two.
.LP
A new syntax for handling vendor specific attributes is supported:
.IP
.I "<vendor>:<attribute-string>"
.LP
where
.I <vendor>
is the vendor's name and
.I <attribute-string>
is a unique string (for that vendor).
This syntax may be used here and in the
.I users
file.
There is an alternate syntax available for specifying vendor specific
attributes and values.
Vendor specific attribute and value identifier strings may be defined in the
.I vendors
file which may be used in place of the default strings \s-2ATTRIBUTE\s+2
and \s-2VALUE\s+2.
.LP
The
.I dictionary
file is read by
.B radiusd
at startup and whenever a \s-2HUP\s+2 signal is received by
.BR radiusd .
The Merit \s-2AAA\s+2 server detects any out-of-date configuration files
upon receipt of a Status-Server (or Management-Poll) request and re-reads
all the configuration files.
This file is maintained by the system administrator using a text editor.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP
.I ../raddb/dictionary
.PD
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR signal (3),
.BR users (5),
.BR vendors (5),
.BR radiusd (8),
.BR radcheck (8),
.BR radpwtst (8)
