.\" Copyright [C] The Regents of the University of Michigan and Merit Network,
.\" Inc. 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998 All Rights Reserved.
.TH DNSCHECK 8 "4 March 1997"
.SH NAME
dnscheck \- checks forward and reverse \s-2DNS\s+2 entries
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dnscheck
[
.B \-c
]
[
.B \-h
]
[
.B \-t
]
[
.B \-v
]
[
.B \-x
]
[
.I "host \&..."
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B dnscheck
utility checks the forward and reverse \s-2DNS\s+2 entries for the given
.IR host (s)
or for the value returned by
.BR gethostname (2)
if the
.I host
name or \s-2IP\s+2 address is omitted.
The
.I host
argument may be either a normal domain name such as
.I myhost.foobah.org
or an \s-2IP\s+2 address in dotted-quad [123.234.123.234] form
and there may be more than one such argument given.
.LP
The intent of this utility is to run it without any arguments and have it
tell you if your system's concept of what it's name is matches, or is
consistent with, what the \s-2DNS\s+2 thinks is the name of your system.
This is useful in tracking down obscure problems when configuring the
Merit \s-2AAA\s+2 server's
.IR clients (5)
file.
.LP
The forward and reverse information is sent to standard output followed by
any information for multiple address and or multiple \s-2DNS\s+2 names, one
per line.
If the
.I host
given is a \s-2CNAME\s+2 then both it and the fully qualified \s-2DNS\s+2
name are printed along with its \s-2IP\s+2 address.  If the
.I host
given is a fully qualified \s-2DNS\s+2 name which has aliases (\s-2CNAME\s+2s),
then
.B dnscheck
is not able to retrieve these from the \s-2DNS\s+2.
.PD
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-c
Toggles checking mode.  This option defaults to "on".  If this option is
toggled to "off" then the
.B dnscheck
utility will perform only one of the two checks, either forward or reverse,
for the given
.IR host .
.TP
.B \-h
Prints a usage message.
.TP
.B \-t
Turns on terse mode.  This option defaults to "off".
.TP
.B \-v
Shows the \s-2RCS\s+2 version information.
.TP
.B \-x
This option is used to increase the debugging level.  The debugging level
is initially zero.  Each
.B \-x
option adds to the default, thereby enabling more and more debugging
information to be produced.
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
.LP
.BR gethostname (2),
.BR clients (5)
.SH BUGS
