.\" Copyright [C] The Regents of the University of Michigan and Merit Network,
.\" Inc. 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998 All Rights Reserved.
.TH VENDORS 5 "29 July 1996"
.SH NAME
vendors \- \s-2RADIUS\s+2 vendor to vendor code mapping file
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ../raddb/vendors
.SH DESCRIPTION
.LP
The
.I vendors
file resides in the \s-2RADIUS\s+2 configuration directory (named
.I .../raddb
somewhere).  It contains a list of zero or more vendor entries.
Each vendor entry contains a vendor name and vendor number.
The vendor numbers are \s-2SMI\s+2 Network Management Private Enterprise Code
numbers as described in the \s-2RADIUS\s+2 \s-2DRAFT\s+2 \s-2RFC\s+2 and
\s-2RFC 1700\s+2.
Each entry optionally contains an interim way of mapping external (with
respect to the \s-2RADIUS\s+2 server) attribute numbers to internal (with
respect to the \s-2RADIUS\s+2 server) vendor specific attribute.
This optional mapping is used both on inbound and outbound, with
respect to the server, \s-2RADIUS\s+2 requests.
Comments are indicated by leading pound sign
.RB (' # ')
characters.
All such comment lines are ignored (as are blank lines).
.LP
The file contains a line of information for each vendor.
Each line has the following form:
.IP
.I "[ <attribute-string> <value-string> ] <vendor-code> <vendor-name>"
.RS
.IP
.I "[ ( [ <standard-value> <vendor-specific-value> ... ] ) ]"
.RE
.LP
For example:
.IP
.ft B
61 Merit ( 211 211 213 213 )
.LP
The
.I <attribute-string>
and
.I <value-string>
are optional strings which default to "Attribute" and "Value" when
not specified.
Non-default strings may be used to specify vendor specific attributes and
values in the dictionary file.
.LP
The
.I <vendor-code>
field is from the Assigned Numbers (\s-2IANA\s+2) \s-2RFC 1700\s+2.
.LP
The
.I <vendor-name>
field is the vendor name.
The vendor name may appear in the
.I clients
file as a
.B type=vendor:nas
entry or in vendor specific attribute names in the
.I dictionary
and
.I users
files.
.LP
The
.I <standard-value>
field is the "external" or "common" attribute number as seen in \s-2RADIUS\s+2
requests on the network.
.LP
The
.I <vendor-specific-value>
field is the "internal" attribute number.
.LP
These last two optional fields may be repeated an optional number
of times within the optional parenthesis.
These numbers are used to map attributes from the common attribute space
defined in the \s-2DRAFT\s+2 \s-2RADIUS\s+2 \s-2RFC\s+2 to internal
non-conflicting vendor specific attributes.
Some vendors currently assign vendor specific attributes in the standard
attribute address space.
As you can see, this is somewhat of a kludge in order to get around this
problem.
.LP
The
.I vendors
file is read by
.B radiusd
upon startup, or when a \s-2HUP\s+2 signal is received by a running
\s-2RADIUS\s+2 server.
The \s-2RADIUS\s+2 server detects any out-of-date configuration files
upon receipt of a Status-Server (or Management-Poll) request and re-reads
all the configuration files.
This file is maintained by the \s-2RADIUS\s+2 administrator using a text editor.
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP
.I ../raddb/clients
.TP
.I ../raddb/users
.PD
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR clients (5),
.BR dictionary (5).
.BR users (5)
