.\" BSDI	rc.8,v 2.2 1998/11/23 17:28:00 polk Exp
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)rc.8	8.2 (Berkeley) 12/11/93
.\"
.Dd December 11, 1993
.Dt RC 8
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm rc
.Nd command script for auto\-reboot and daemons
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm rc
.Nm rc.first
.Nm rc.configure
.Nm rc.hardware
.Nm netstart
.Nm rc.local
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm rc
is the command script which controls the automatic reboot.
.Nm rc.first
is the script holding commands pertinent to the local 
site which must be run before file system consistency checks
such as 
.Xr sysctl 8
commands to set limits or
.Xr splice
commands to configure splice disk devices. 
.Nm rc.configure 
is a directory holding scripts which may perform
additional configuration of the local system.
.Nm rc.hardware 
is a directory holding scripts which may perform
additional hardware configuration such as loading firmware
into multi-port serial controllers, enabling power management
on systems so equipped, or other run-time hardware
configuration.
.Nm netstart
is the script holding variable definitions and commands necessary
to start networking for the local site.
.Nm rc.local
is the script holding commands pertinent to the local site
which are executed after the file systems are mounted and the standard
daemons are started.
.Pp
When an automatic reboot is in progress,
.Nm rc
is invoked with the argument
.Em autoboot .
The first portion of
.Nm rc
excutes any commands in 
.Nm rc.first
and then 
runs an
.Xr fsck 8
with option
.Fl p
to ``preen'' all the disks of minor inconsistencies resulting
from the last system shutdown and to check for serious inconsistencies
caused by hardware or software failure.
If this auto-check and repair succeeds, then the second part of
.Nm rc
is run.
.Pp
The second part of
.Nm rc ,
which is run after an auto-reboot succeeds and also if
.Nm rc
is invoked when a single user shell terminates (see
.Xr init 8 ) ,
starts all the daemons on the system, preserves editor files
and clears the scratch directory
.Pa /tmp .
.Pp
After a successful 
.Xr fsck
local (non-NFS) filesystems are mounted and 
any local configuration scripts are executed from the
.Nm rc.configure
directory.  Following 
.Nm rc.configure ,
any scripts in the 
.Nm rc.hardware
script directory are executed.  Once any hardware configuration
scripts have been executed, the
.Nm netstart
script is executed to set the hostname and start any networking 
interfaces.  After
.Nm netstart
any NFS filesystems listed in 
.Xr fstab
are mounted and the standard system daemons are started.  Finally, any
commands listed in the
.Nm rc.local 
script are executed.
.Pp
Following tradition, the startup files
.Nm rc ,
.Nm rc.first ,
.Nm rc.local
and
.Nm netstart
reside in
.Pa /etc .
The startup script directories 
.Nm rc.configure
and 
.Nm rc.hardware 
are also located there.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr init 8 ,
.Xr reboot 8 ,
.Xr savecore 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm rc
command appeared in
.Bx 4.0 .
